[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>SUE MORTER: Though our
bodies are amazingly designed
to heal themselves,
they are constantly
being overtaxed by the steadily
rising number of toxins
all around us the
practice of detoxification
is an ancient one, and is
necessary now more than ever
to deal with the ever-growing
threats to our well-being
and restore our body's
natural ability to heal.
Dr. Alejandro Junger is a leader
in the functional medicine
field and has for decades
been focusing his work on ways
to detoxify the body and mind.
His bestselling program,
"Clean" and the new "Clean 7,"
have helped thousands of
people detox their way back
to true health and vitality.
Welcome, Dr. Junger.
Wonderful to have you
on "Healing Matrix."
>>ALEJANDRO JUNGER: It's
wonderful to-- wonderful
to be here.
>>SUE: Wonderful.
So tell us about your
background and how
you came to focus your attention
in detox the way that you are.
>>JUNGER: I was born in Uruguay
in South America where life,
by default, was very healthy.
There were no supermarkets
back when I was born.
So we bought our food in
the food markets, right?
And we knew the farmers and
how they grew their food
and there was no chemicals.
So by default
everything was fine.
My mother would
cook all our meals,
and we were healthy and strong.
Then I moved after
medical school to New York
to do my post-graduate
training, and there, life
was completely different.
I was starting to
eat from supermarkets
and get things in boxes
in jars and tubes,
and then put something
in the microwave oven,
and in two minutes I
would have something
that looked like what my mother
took all day to cook, right?
But as I went on living and
working hard there and all
the stress of
training in medicine,
I started getting sick.
And by the end of my
training, I was really sick.
I took a few days off and
saw a gastroenterologist,
a psychiatrist,
and an allergist,
and I was diagnosed with severe
depression, severe allergies,
and irritable bowel
syndrome, and I was given
seven prescription medications.
I refused to take seven
prescription medications,
and I had two big aha moments.
One was that I wouldn't want
to live on pills in order
to function every day,
but the second one
was that that is exactly what
I was doing for my patients.
So I took off.
I went to India to
live in a monastery,
I learned a few
things, and I kept
on looking for a solution
for my health problems
that didn't include
seven pills every day.
And it wasn't until I stumbled
upon the concept and practices
of cleansing and detoxification
that I was able to completely
restore my health and some.
I looked and felt
10 years younger.
To the point that
all my patients
and my family and my
friends were asking me,
what should I do?
I want to do the same.
That's when I started
looking into cleansing
and detoxification.
>>SUE: Can we explain
for our audience what
you mean by detox
for those that are
tuning in just kind of beginning
this journey for themselves?
>>JUNGER: So
detoxification is actually
the description of a biochemical
process that is actually better
named biotransformation,
which is what our cells,
especially in the liver, but
in many other places, too,
what they do is they
detect in the blood
the molecules that
are toxic, and they,
through enzymes, effect changes
in them, chemical changes.
Some atoms get taken
away from the molecules,
some atoms are put in,
and they biotransform
these toxic molecules
into non-toxic.
And also, they biotransform
them from liposoluble,
meaning they only
dissolve in fat,
which is 90% of the exotoxins
that we are exposed to and end
up in our blood, and they
turn them into water-soluble,
which is the only way in which
our bodies can eliminate these
molecules to--
>>SUE: Take It out
through the bladder--
>>JUNGER: Through sweat,
through urine, through feces,
through breath, right?
So this is a very
specific set of reactions
that happen in the body that
can be called detoxification.
>>SUE: So how essential
is it for people
to focus on detoxification
specifically today?
>>JUNGER: The problem
today is that because
of our unnatural
lifestyle and because
of the increase in external
toxins that we are exposed to,
we are left with a situation in
which toxic molecules are more,
but the work of
detoxification is less,
so it's like a double-whammy.
And the work of detoxification
is less for two main reasons.
One of them is that
energetically, the body
has only a certain
amount of energy
every day, until you go
back to sleep and recharge,
and it has to
allocate this energy
to work, thinking, moving,
hair growing, heart beating,
digesting, and detoxification,
among others, right?
But because we are
digesting all the time,
and digestion consumes
energy, there's
energy that's been stolen
from other functions,
and detoxification
is one of them.
Everybody knows or
has had the experience
that if you have a very large
meal, you end up getting tired
and can only go to sleep, right?
That is because digestion
consumes so much energy, right?
So because we are
eating all the time,
we're digesting all the time.
There's many functions
that are actually
being stolen energy from,
detoxification being only one
of them, right?
So that reduces the
work of detoxification.
Plus, as I said, the liver
cells and other cells,
they add molecules to
the toxic molecules
to transform them into
something different.
Where are the molecules
that they add coming from?
These are nutrients, and our
foods are devoid of nutrients.
So many of the nutrients that
our liver cells need in order
to complete optimally their
work of biotransformation
are not even provided
to them by us
through our modern
food-like processed.
>>SUE: So even though the body
is designed to detoxify itself,
we're not getting the nutrients
that are needed for it to do
that process regularly, and
we're consuming energies
in other ways as well--
I have some stresses that are
contributing to this as well--
>>JUNGER: As well, as well.
The stress is
contributing in many ways.
One of them is stealing
energy from other processes,
but there's an increase
in inflammation
which also needs
energy, and there's
many ways in which stress puts
a dent into the detoxification
work of the body.
>>SUE: So we only have so
much energy to work with,
and if it's being consumed
with stresses and other things,
it's not available for this
detoxification process.
>>JUNGER: That's exactly right.
>>SUE: In the history
of detoxification,
it goes way back.
What can you share
with us about--
>>JUNGER: So what's
crazy is that we
talk about detoxification
because of all
the toxic molecules
that we are exposed to
through the air we breathe and
the water we drink and shower
with, the medications we
use, the cosmetics we use,
the cleaning products that we
apply to everything, but mostly
through the foods or food-like
products that we eat, right?
And all these are relatively new
in our evolutionary time line.
But detoxification
is not a new concept,
it's a millinery concept
in practice, right?
Because the body in
itself produces toxins--
endotoxins.
So the body has a system
to get rid of these toxins,
neutralize and
eliminate these toxins.
And it also
recognizes things that
are not beneficial or toxic from
the outside-- the exotoxins,
right?
But detoxification as a concept
is thousands of years old.
In fact, it's the basis of
many systems of medicine.
Ayurvedic medicine is
based on detoxification
as one of the core principles--
one of the pillars of health
is a good detoxification
system, a working
and optimal
detoxification system.
>>SUE: Can you tell us a little
bit about your clean detox
program?
So what are the main
components of that program?
>>JUNGER: So one
is the reduction
of the workload of
the digestive system,
and we do that by replacing
breakfast and dinner
with a liquid meal.
A liquid meal needs much
less work of digestion.
And then for lunch,
there is a solid meal,
but it is choosing from a
list of foods that are allowed
and leaving out another list
of foods that are not allowed,
which would be the
foods that are generally
causing allergic reactions, all
kinds of negative reactions,
like acidification,
mucus-forming,
all kinds of food
sensitivities that
may not be allergies in itself,
but are hindering some aspect
of bodily functions.
>>SUE: So are you
working with the pH
with monitoring the
alkaline-acid balance
in the body with it?
Or is that just a
byproduct of the foods
that you're recommending?
>>JUNGER: It's a
byproduct, yeah.
I've looked into that
when designing it,
I don't follow that on people--
that there's no need to follow
pH while you do the program.
>>SUE: So if they
eat these foods,
they're going to create
an alkaline environment
in the body which
allows the system
to function the way that
it's designed in general?
>>JUNGER: They're
going to create
a lack of excess acidity.
>>SUE: So the
system doesn't have
to work so hard to do its job?
>>JUNGER: Exactly.
>>SUE: We're not
overlearning it.
>>JUNGER: When
there's more acidity,
then the body has to counteract
to keep homeostasis, right?
And your bones will start
fizzling their salts out
in order to buffer that
acidity with the resulting
osteoporosis and many other
problems of a constant acid
environment.
>>SUE: So the original
program was 21 days.
>>JUNGER: Yes.
>>SUE: And now you've
come out with a "Clean 7,"
which is people in seven days
could start to experience
enough of a shift that they
might be encouraged to go--
>>JUNGER: To get a taste.
>>SUE: --a longer period
of time to do deeper work.
>>JUNGER: It's
reducing the workload
of the digestive system
and then supporting
the liver and the other
detox organs and tissues
nutritionally, right?
And also adding a
few other things
like probiotics, herbal
antimicrobials, and liver
support with silymarin,
things like that, right?
So you support every
aspect of detoxification.
>>SUE: So stop
the runaway train,
and then let's start to
refuel and recollect.
So what's the protocol
for the Clean 7?
>>JUNGER: So the
protocol for this--
for Clean 7 is a
little different.
Clean 21 is shake, lunch,
shake, same thing for 21 days.
The protocol for Clean 7
is, shake, lunch, shake.
The second day, you have shake,
lunch, but the second shake,
the dinner shake is two hours
earlier than the night before.
On day 3, dinner shake
even two hours earlier
than the second day, right?
So you're building up
the window that you
leave between the last meal
of one day, from 12 hours,
to the first meal of the other
day, to 14 hours, to 16 hours,
and then on day 4 to
day 5, you do from lunch
to lunch a 24-hour fast.
>>SUE: Mmm.
So this program is safe
for anyone to plug into?
>>JUNGER: Not really.
Pregnant women
shouldn't be doing it.
Breastfeeding is not a good
time to do that either.
And then people that
are taking medications
that need a very constant blood
level, like anti-epileptics,
antiarrhythmics, blood-thinning
medications, anticoagulants,
right?
All those medications need very
constant blood levels, right?
And when you start
changing things drastically
in terms of your
habits and diet,
absorption rates can
bring the levels high up,
and if you're anticoagulants,
you can bleed out,
or if you're on antiarrhythmics,
you can trigger an arrhythmia.
So those patients I asked
to be followed very closely
by whoever prescribe
those medications.
>>SUE: And so if people
do have challenges
on the program, what types of
challenges might we anticipate?
>>JUNGER: One of the
problems that people
have in the few days
at the beginning
is when they have withdrawals of
whatever they were dependent on
or addicted to, right?
Whether it's coffee,
sugar, alcohol--
whatever it is that you've
been using nonstop sometimes
in order to function,
stopping that is difficult. So
you go through withdrawals.
Coffee is a very typical one.
So many people I used to
only functioning and starting
their day after they had
their cup of coffee, right?
So the first two three
days of no coffee
may elicit headaches and
all kinds of reactions,
but by the third, fourth
day, most people are sailing.
>>SUE: And then you
mention boosters
to make the detox even deeper.
>>JUNGER: So that is how
I achieved in seven days
a deeper experience
in my new program
than the first seven days of
the 21-day program, right?
The 21-day program is
like running a marathon,
and it has a very specific
kind of benefit, right?
But the seven days is like
running a sprint race, right?
And that is how I was able to
achieve deeper results in seven
days, by using what we're
talking about as boosters,
right?
Which are the advaitic
adaptigenic herbs
that I included on
the seven-day program.
>>SUE: OK.
So someone's now taking
some herbal supplementation
alongside of doing
the shakes and having
the intermittent
fasting, and it's
allowing for a faster
cleanse to happen
in a safe manner that isn't
going to cause side effects.
>>JUNGER: Yeah.
Well, usually there
is no side effects
even if you don't use the herbs.
The herbs, more than
avoiding side effects,
are just deepening things.
>>SUE: OK.
And what is deepening?
>>JUNGER: Deepening
means, for example,
one of the things that happens
because of our sad standard
American diet is that our
inflammatory system is
constantly turned on, right?
Food harms our
intestinal lining,
these little hyper-permeability
holes we call leaky gut, right?
Are created, the inflammatory
system is right there,
it starts getting
activated, and we
are walking around with
a factory of inflammation
in our bellies, right?
And that, already by
an elimination diet,
by replacing meals for liquid
meals start getting reduced.
But when you add
turmeric to the mix,
then it's like really putting
out the fire with three fire
trucks as opposed to--
>>SUE: A garden hose.
>>JUNGER: Yes.
>>SUE: [LAUGHS]
Yes, turmeric has
wonderful, wonderful benefits.
>>JUNGER: And that's
one of the herbs we use.
But there's others.
There's ashwagandha,
there's shatavari.
Each of them has a different
role in this whole scheme.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>JUNGER: Right?
>>SUE: I think it'd be valuable
to share some of these herbs,
because and then people might
recognize some of these names,
and recognizing that you have a
program that puts them together
in a fashion that will
be most beneficial--
>>JUNGER: I'll give
you the rundown.
>>SUE: OK.
>>JUNGER: So one
of them is moringa.
Moringa is the most
incredible and complete source
of nutrition that exists.
There is a doctor--
there was a doctor,
Dr. Narendra Singh who
was a legend of
Ayurvedic medicine--
he was an MD and an
Ayurvedic medicine doctor,
and I had the fortune of
spending some time with him
and I asked him
about moringa, and he
said that a human being can
live only on moringa and water,
meaning moringa that
has every nutrient
that a human being requires for
life and optimal functioning,
right?
So it is the best multi-vitamin,
multi-mineral, multi
-antioxidant that exists.
Moringa is an amazing,
amazing Ayurvedic herb.
Another one is
turmeric, which is
best-known for its
anti-inflammatory
and analgesic effects, right?
But that's only
one of them, right?
It's also full of antioxidants.
It's also a really
good prebiotic,
and so it helps the
intestinal flora.
And there's many other
benefits from it, right?
Then a third Ayurvedic herb--
and I call these
Narendra's favorite--
Dr. Narendra Singh,
this legend told me,
these are my favorite herbs
for detoxification, right?
So moringa, turmeric,
ashwagandha,
which is the most
potent adaptogen, right?
Everybody's now talking
about adrenal fatigue,
and ashwagandha is the
one that could really help
with recharging your adrenals.
But if you have
high blood pressure
and a stressful situation,
it will bring it down.
So it's a powerful
adaptogen, right?
Then there is
shatavari, which is
really well-known in India
for balancing female hormones,
all right?
So those are some
of the main ones.
>>SUE: And you're
working with these
in a balanced fashion
that allow people
to get the proper dosages,
to get the effects that we're
looking for detoxification
without someone having
to figure out how to manage
all that on their own?
>>JUNGER: Absolutely.
>>SUE: What is the
greatest benefit of Clean 7
would you say?
>>JUNGER: So in
my opinion, we are
so oblivious to what is
happening to us in terms
of the difference
between how we live
and how nature designed
us to live, right?
We don't question breakfast,
lunch, and dinner,
we just sit down and
eating-- and actually, we
think this is healthy,
having three meals a day.
Some doctors say
five meals a day,
some personal trainers they
have six meals a day, right?
But the truth is is that
our design by nature
is completely different.
And when you do
the clean program,
you start questioning
all these things, right?
And this is mentally
and a level of awareness
a really good effect.
But other than
that, inflammation
gets reduced, leaky gut
starts to get repaired.
All the repair
processes in the body
have a chance to function
and repair things, right?
You lose weight, your
skin looks shiny,
and your eyes look
bright and white.
There's a glow about people
that finish the program.
Sleep becomes
incredibly better, deep.
People are calm by the
end of the program.
Calm and even.
I mean, digestion improves,
bloating disappears.
The puffiness that people
walk around these days
just melts away.
The benefits are--
>>SUE: Quite a few.
>>JUNGER: Quite a few.
Yeah.
>>SUE: So how often
do you recommend
someone do the program?
>>JUNGER: Depending on where
that person is at the time.
You have to think
of detoxing programs
as you think of showers, right?
And how often you
need a shower really
depends on what you
do between showers.
How often you need
a clean program
is depending on what do you
do between clean programs.
If you finish the clean
program and you go back
to your coffee, pizza,
and sugar and whatever,
you're going to
need one right away.
But if you maintain
the benefits and you
watch to reduce the exposure
to toxins in so many ways,
then the hope is that
eventually, nobody
will need a detox program,
because the body's already
detoxing.
>>SUE: Right.
>>JUNGER: Right?
And as long as you learn
how to support the detox
processes in the
body, and then you
learn how to reduce the
exposures of the toxins
that you are absorbing,
you'll be fine.
>>SUE: Can you
share with us some
of the more dramatic healings
that have come from the program
that you are aware?
>>JUNGER: Somebody sent
their sister-in-law to me.
And when she came to see me,
I was working in New York,
and she basically
told me, I'm very
afraid my doctor
wants me to start
methotrexate and prednisone.
Methotrexate is a
chemotherapy agent, right?
And it's designed to really
attack your immune system
so that your immune system
doesn't attack your own body.
This woman had an autoimmune
disease called spondylosis,
ankylosing spondylosis.
And she wanted to have
kids, she was just married.
So she was very afraid that
chemotherapy would prevent that
from happening in the future.
And so she came with all the
autoimmune positive tests,
and she was being seen by one
of the great doctors in New
York for that subject, right?
So I said to her,
listen, let's try--
before you start this treatment,
let's do detoxification.
And for her, I had to
personalize it, because she
also had mercury toxicity.
So to the 21-day program,
I added a chelating agent,
and I started slowly
detoxifying her mercury as well.
She went back to her doctor
and said, I want to wait,
and I'm doing this program.
To make a long story
short, three months later,
she not only had no
symptoms, the color
had returned-- she
was gray when she
came to see me the
first time, and then
she was pink and radiant.
And the ANA, the
positive antibodies
towards her own cells
turned negative.
So it was just an
amazing result.
>>SUE: Wonderful.
We have a video
testimonial of one
of the many people
who've profoundly
benefited from the original
21-day clean program.
Let's take a look at April
DeMarco's experience.
>>APRIL DEMARCO: Well, I sleep.
I think that would be the
greatest time line for a clean.
Sleep through the night.
My name is April
DeMarco, and we're here
in New York City, as we hear
form the noise behind us.
And I'm here to [INAUDIBLE].
Even though I had a lot
of health conditions,
I just kind of accepted
them and lived with them.
For instance, I was
a clinical insomniac.
I didn't sleep for
more than three hours
a night for 10 years.
I had lost a very close
friend of mine last year,
and I spent a period of
time gaining some weight,
emotionally eating.
I definitely was depressed,
and at that time,
like a serendipity, from
several different ways,
I kept on hearing about Clean.
My sister referred me
to the Goop website.
I caught a Martha Stewart
interview with Dr. Junger.
I decided I was going to read--
order and read
this book, "Clean."
And when I saw the
variety of foods,
I understood now that I
could do this for 21 days.
It was unmistakable.
By the third night I was
beginning to sleep longer.
And by the fifth night, I
slept through the night.
And I knew what I sounded like
five days of eating this way,
and now I was cured of something
I was ill of for 10 years.
I was blown away.
>>SUE: Wow.
So this was the result
of the 21-day program.
How do the results of the
seven-day program compare?
>>JUNGER: It's a
taste of that, right?
I mean, as you
heard her say, she
slept through the night
on the fifth night, right?
So that falls well into
the one-week program.
So it's results like that
are possible within one week.
>>SUE: Yes.
So what makes Clean
7 so effective?
>>JUNGER: It is just
a really good way
to create the conditions and
support the detoxification
systems in the body.
And our bodies are miraculous.
It's not Clean 7 that's
doing anything, right?
Clean 7 is just
creating the conditions
for your body to actually
restore its natural ability
to heal itself.
And the natural ability of the
body to heal is miraculous.
And you can do things that defy
even scientific explanation,
right?
When you create the conditions,
when you remove the obstacles
and provide whatever
is lacking--
>>SUE: Yes.
>>JUNGER: --everything
correct myself.
>>SUE: One of the three
pillars that you've
based Clean 7 on is
functional medicine.
Can you tell us about that?
>>JUNGER: So functional
medicine was the--
for me, the way to
understand detoxification.
And functional medicine
really has two main principles
that I use in my programs.
One of them is the
elimination diet, right?
The five big groups to eliminate
are gluten, dairy, sugar,
coffee, and Alcohol, And then
there's a few other ones,
right?
For different reasons.
Like night shades that can
trigger the inflammation
processes, right?
And in the five R's
stand for remove,
which is removing the
toxic load and exposure
to toxins in our daily life by
eating whole foods as opposed
to food-like products,
and watching whatever
we are using in our households,
in their offices in order
to reduce the toxic load.
The second R is for
restoring, restoring
and reintroducing the good
nutrients that are needed.
The third one is
for re-inoculation.
So re-inoculating
the good bacteria,
because part of the
removing is removing
the bad organisms in the gut.
Then the fourth R is for repair.
And as I told you before,
our Achilles heel of health
is the intestinal lining,
and so many diseases
start in the intestines.
And health and disease
And the intestinal lining
is a huge part of it,
because it's the border
between the outside of the body
and the inside, the
proper inside the blood.
So when that gets disrupted
and leaky gut comes to be,
then there's a bunch of things
that happen which lead up
to symptoms and diseases.
The repairing of the
intestinal lining
is really paramount for
recovering and restoring
health, right?
So that's the fourth R. And
the fifth one is relaxation,
because as you said, stress
is a part of any disease
no matter the disease
we're talking about.
Either as a cause
or as a consequence.
>>SUE: Yes.
So in this elimination process
you were speaking of earlier,
can we speak about the
difference between that
and basic allergy testing?
>>JUNGER: So allergy testing is
supposed to measure antibodies.
So if you eat peas and
you're allergic to peas,
your body will
generate antibodies--
molecules that will attack
those other molecules
that the body's recognizing
as potentially harmful, right?
>>SUE: Yes.
>>JUNGER: That is the basis
of allergic reactions.
But not all food reactions
that are negative
are of the allergic type.
There Are other
ways in which foods
can affect the body
negatively which are not
measurable by
measuring antibodies,
because they're not
allergic-type reactions, right?
And this is what I
was mentioning before.
Foods that are highly
acidifying, foods that
are mucus-forming.
And there are other
processes and ways
in which foods can be negative.
So to begin with, food
allergy testings-- tests
are very limiting, right?
They only really
give you the results
if you are producing
antibodies to those foods.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>JUNGER: And that doesn't
mean that the foods that
don't produce antibodies
are good for you, right?
>>SUE: Yes.
>>JUNGER: But there's also
negative positives and false
positives and false
negatives, right?
So some people may have
antibodies, but not
be allergic to the food.
And some people may be
allergic to the food
without antibodies yet, or
being able to measure them.
So they're very confusing at
best and completely a negative
at worst, because some people
then get the idea that they
shouldn't be eating this food,
and they shouldn't-- and they
don't need them for the
rest of their lives.
And the truth is that things
are very dynamic in the body.
You can be forming
antibodies to a certain food
today because you
have leaky gut.
When that is repaired,
your antibodies
may disappear when
you eat the same food.
So food allergy tests
I don't use at all.
What I do use is
a period of time
in which I eliminate
all foods that
are known to generate
food sensitivities, food
allergies, and other
negative reactions,
and then reintroduce
them one by one
and actually see what the
experience of the patient
is when they
reintroduce these foods.
And I find these to be way
more accurate than any food
allergy test I've ever seen.
>>SUE: Can you list just
a couple of foods that are
acidifying so people
understand what's--
>>JUNGER: The most
important one?
Dairy.
Dairy is highly acidifying.
So a lot of people
are told, oh, you
drink your milk so that your
bones can stay strong because
of the calcium content, right?
Whereas the effect is
actually the contrary.
Because when you drink
milk, your body gets acidic.
And you can have your
viewers do this--
buy this the pH strips,
measure the urine pH
before a glass of milk,
and after a glass of milk
and prove it for
yourselves, right?
But what happens is that when
your blood becomes more acidic,
the body doesn't like that, so
the body tries to counteract.
And there's many ways in
which they counteract.
For example, if he needs
to counteract a fast,
you start breathing heavier.
So that you start
blowing more CO2, which
comes from carbonic
acid in the blood.
And that's one way of alkalizing
the body in the short term.
But in the long term,
that is not enough.
So the body starts
activating other mechanisms
of buffering acidity,
one of them being
the fizzling of
your bone's salts
that are counteracting acidity.
So you end up with the
opposite effect of what you
intended that milk to benefit.
>>SUE: Exactly.
So you mentioned about
Ayurveda earlier.
Is there anything
else you'd like
to share with us about
the foundation of Ayurveda
in your work?
>>JUNGER: Ayurveda is a
thousands-of-year-old system
of healing.
And the word is that
thousands of years
ago, there were these
enlightened beings called
the Rishis that could
communicate with the higher
intelligent, right?
Call it nature, call it God,
call you whatever you want,
right?
But what happened was that they
basically got the instruction
manual for this vehicle, right?
From the manufacturer itself.
And in that way, understands
the body not only
biochemically, cellularly,
but also energetically, right?
And beyond.
So it's an incredible
system of medicine,
which is really
interesting theoretically,
but what is amazing about it
is it is really effective,
and you cannot
argue with success.
>>SUE: Results, right.
The Gaia series
"Thrive" dives deep
into the science of Ayurveda.
>>JUSTINE LEMOS: When people
feel stuck in their lives,
in their bodies on any of
these layers of the self,
Ayurveda describes this
stock physical matter
in the digestive tract as ama.
Ama is the product of
anything that's undigested.
It is gunk factor that
accumulates on any
of the layers of the self.
>> Ayurveda also is
this wonderful knowledge
of digestion.
And so understanding digestion
doesn't just apply to food,
it applies to emotion,
it applies to everything
that we take in
through the senses.
All of life gets metabolized.
And if we're able to do
that efficiently, if we're
able to do that thoroughly,
then we have vibrancy.
If not, then we have stress.
>>SUE: Tell us more about
the Ayurveda concept of Ama.
>>JUNGER: Ama is the
name for toxicity, right?
But in Ayurveda,
it goes beyond what
functional medicine considers
as exotoxins and xenobionics.
So ama is not only
the waste product
of your metabolism, the
toxins from the outside,
but it is also the way that your
body reacts to the formation
of mucus, the retention of fat.
So everything that vibrates in
a certain spectrum of energy
frequency which is toxic
is called ama, and that
includes thoughts and emotions.
>>SUE: So it's like a
stickiness to the system that
bogs it down, is it this
kind of a characteristic?
>>JUNGER: The thing is this.
Now we know-- now I know
from functional medicine
and from science
in general that one
of the ways in which the body
defends itself and buffers
toxicity is by generating mucus,
because these toxins are not
water-soluble, they
are fat-soluble.
But in the interim, between
getting in the blood
and getting dissolved
in the fat--
in your brain, in your breasts,
in your testicles, in your--
wherever there are organs,
there's fat, right?
But it takes a while to
get dissolved in fat.
So in the meantime,
they're carried by--
surrounded by mucus,
and the body accumulates
mucus, and then mucus that
accumulates, that's also ama.
>>SUE: And so we also would like
to know just a couple of foods
that are mucus-producing that
could overload that system
and produce more ama.
So can you list a few of those?
>>JUNGER: Sugar.
Dairy.
Glutinous-- all processed foods.
And all foods loaded with
toxic chemicals, right?
>>SUE: Yes.
>>JUNGER: Yeah.
By the way, the stickiness is
not only a material stickiness
of the mucous, right?
>>SUE: Yes.
>>JUNGER: It's
also the stickiness
of bad thoughts and emotions.
>>SUE: Tell us about conversely
the Ayurvedic concept of agni.
>>JUNGER: Agni, in a way,
it's not the opposite of ama,
but it is the opposite of ama,
because when ama increases,
agni decreases.
And to decrease ama, you
need to increase agni.
Agni is the fire of
digestion, right?
When you throw solids
and foods inside,
they have to be
somewhat broken down,
and where does that start?
Yeah, it starts in the mouth
with saliva and chewing,
but it really gets
accelerated in the stomach
with hydrochloric acid.
Now grab a glass of
hydrochloric acid
and throw it on
your carpet here.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>JUNGER: It'll burn through.
It is like fire--
>>SUE: It's amazing.
>>JUNGER: --and liquid, right?
So this is the
fire of digestion,
and the fire of digestion
is really, really important.
In Ayurvedic medicine, it's
considered the spark of life.
And if you dampen it,
and if you decrease it,
then you are decreasing
the spark of life
and the force of life in
your body, which allows ama
to accumulate and other
unwanted visitors to come in,
like bacteria and fungus
and things like that.
Agni is like fire, and
when you start a fire,
if you add too much wood,
you will drowning it,
you will suffocate it, right?
And it's the same thing
with the fire of digestion.
If you throw so
much food inside,
you will dampen your fire--
>>SUE: Can't keep up.
>>JUNGER: Yeah
>>SUE: Tell us a little
bit about the doshas.
>>JUNGER: As a
quantum physicist,
you will understand this, right?
That everything in the
planet, everything that exists
and that doesn't exist
is energy, right?
And the different
expressions of energy
are because of the different
vibrations and frequencies,
right?
So everything
according to Ayurveda
is influenced by the
five elements, right?
Water, fire, air,
earth, and ether.
And each one has certain
qualities of vibration.
But everything that exists
contains some combination
of influences of
these five elements.
Not only your body, but also
the foods that we eat, right?
Now people are affected by--
or influenced by the different
elements in different ways,
and Ayurveda determined--
or identifies
three major ways in which
people are constituted.
That's why they're called
their body constitution
or their dosha constitution.
And depending on how influential
any of the elements is,
depending on your
constitution, there's
three different body
constitutions-- body type
or physiologic or metabolic
constitutions, right?
So it's pitta, kapha, and vata.
And for example, pitta
is the one that in which
fire is the most prone
to get out of balance.
So the three doshas
exist in everybody,
but there's one dosha
that is dominant.
In pitta, for example,
the fire dosha
is the dominant element,
and also the most likely
to go out of balance.
How does it go out of balance?
If you put fire in--
so if you eat foods that--
whose dosha is also fiery,
then you're feeding the fire,
then you let the fire get
out of control, for example.
If you're a pitta constitution
and you eat fiery foods,
like spicy foods,
mangoes, and other foods
in which the dosha
of the food is fiery,
then the likelihood
of dosha imbalance
becomes a reality,
and dosha imbalances,
according to Ayurveda medicine,
are the root of disease,
both acute and chronic.
>>SUE: It doesn't seem like
it should be that hard, right?
If we just let the body do
what it was built to do,
so this is a way that we can
get back in touch with them.
How can people learn more about
you, your work, and Clean?
>>JUNGER: www.cleanprogram.com,
or follow me
on Instagram, DrAlejandroJunger.
We are Clean Program
also on Instagram.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
Thank you so much, Dr. Junger,
for being with us today
on "Healing Matrix," It's
been a wonderful conversation.
>>JUNGER: Thank
you for having me.
>>SUE: Yeah.
For those of us feeling
blocked and wishing
to experience true health, Dr.
Junger's remarkably effective
detox program can
be a powerful tool
to restore the
natural functioning
of our bodily systems and regain
the well-being for which we
are truly designed.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter.
Thank you for joining
us on "Healing Matrix".
[MUSIC PLAYING]